>> For the last several
years, Robert Lawlor has been
researching the idea that
the basic laws of proportion
and geometry, which
are inherent in space,
are also present in time.
This idea was evoked in him
by coming across the fact
that Hindu philosophy is based
on a trinity of consciousness,
space, and time.
The apex of this trinity
is consciousness.
The first element is time,
and the second is space.
Philosophically,
the Hindus believe
that these three
elements are not
dissociable from one another.
They must be considered as a
totality, as a basic trinity.
As we know, most
religions of the world
have a trinity as the
base of their ideology.
The Father, Son, and the
Holy Ghost in Christianity.
Beauty, truth, and
justice in Platonism.
Osiris, Horus, and Isis
in Egyptian thought.
There are many other
examples of this.
In Hinduism, we
know of the trinity
as Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva.
But this is an even older
concept of creation,
requiring the three elements,
consciousness, time, and space.
Space is Brahma, consciousness
is Vishnu, and time is Shiva.
Very interestingly, the
entire society of India
believe that inherent in
time are all the forces
and powers of nature.
They're locked into patterns
that express themselves
in time.
Those forces are equal to
expansion and contraction,
like a movement
away from center,
a movement toward center,
and the center itself.
We have then a sort
of physics that's
associated with
abstract concepts
and that have been
deified as gods
or archetypal characters that
embody these abstract elements.
In that way, the
whole myth of creation
is readable on various levels
of activities of intelligence.
The Hindus respect
the power of time
and believe that
human consciousness
in its activities of
concentration, remembrance,
and imagination could
actually draw forth
the particular
aspects and qualities
of the forces inherent in time.
They organized their society
so that these three elements
were held in a kind of
balance within the thinking
and imagining processes of
the entire living population.
For example, the Brahmins,
in their external rituals,
worship the masculine principle
of Brahma, of which is space.
In their hidden
and secret rituals,
they worship the feminine.
This was also true of
the commercial caste.
There are four basic castes
of people in ancient India,
the scholarly and priestly
caste, the Brahmins.
The second is the aristocracy,
called the Kshatriya.
These are the symbolic
rulers of the country
who perform the ceremonies
of centrality and power.
The third cast is the Vaishya,
the merchants, bankers,
and property owners.
And the fourth caste,
called the Shudra,
are the workers, artists,
and the general population
as a whole.
Of course, the vast
majority of people
were in the Shudra caste.
The Shudra is where
all the arts come from,
because they are the
people of manual dexterity.
Each one of these castes,
like the Brahmins,
worshipped a different
aspect of this trinity.
The aristocracy and the
Shudra worshipped the same.
They worship externally.
They worship the feminine.
And in secret rituals, they
worship the phallus, or male.
There are many people who have
studied the caste system who
realized that this fourfold
division is necessary to hold
up civilized populations.
Democracy is really
a veiled form
of this basic system
of order, based
on the needs which are
provided through our vocations.
We perpetuate this
without realizing
it is the basic formation
of all societies.
These divisions of people into
the aptitudes and mentality
that predominates
their vocational powers
was a way to keep the connection
with the spiritual world
and the forces which
surround society in balance.
In other words, by
extending and emphasizing
the characteristics that are
basic to the forces which
surround us in the
universe, the Hindus
believed that they
were actually forging
a bond and a connection
between heaven and earth,
between sky and land.
This equalization of the
masculine and feminine powers
is represented in time cycles
which influence and affect
the developments on Earth.
We will examine the very ancient
prehistoric origins of India
and the people who settled
in India, remembering
that archeologically,
the Indus Valley has
revealed human
settlements, which
goes back over 400,000 years.
It is one of the oldest
archeologically-verified
settlements on the
face of the Earth.
Those findings in
caves and cave imagery,
which date back to
over 400,000 years,
shows that people already
had musical instruments.
They were hunting
with bows and arrows.
And they had already made
the first classic steps
towards the fundamentals
of civilization.
This was evident in the earliest
archeological finds in India.
The whole idea that many people
refer to India as Mother India
may have been in this
cycle of time, the place
where the remembrance
of previous cycles
began to resurface and
re-emerge as a formative force
in the whole
development of humanity.
The Hindus offer us
probably the most
exacting of all the
prophetic systems of time.
It's called the cycles of yugas.
Many people have heard of
what is called the Kali
Yuga, in which we
are purportedly
well-established with
our modern society.
To understand the
yuga principle,
we have to acknowledge a certain
experience in our own organism,
that there are phases in the
development of our organism,
which are inherent
in and associated
with a certain passage of time.
For example, we reach
seven years of age
and our teeth fall out.
And we get new teeth.
We have nothing
to say about that.
And by another seven
years, suddenly we
have completely reorganized
our pelvic region or glandular
secretions.
And we are now in
puberty, and have achieved
sexual reproductive capacities.
The changes just seem to
occur in the nature of time.
This is a kind of genesis,
a process of maturation,
and eventually
elimination through death
that we have nothing
to say about.
The Hindus extended this
cyclic phase to everything
in the universe.
They said that
everything is inherently
dominated and created by time.
The Kali Yuga is the crone,
which Shiva holds in his arms
as one of his aspects.
The triadic nature of
his feminine nature
takes three forms; the virgin,
the mother, and the crone.
The crone is called Kali,
and Kali is the name
for the concluding yuga.
Let's get the term
yuga straight.
Yuga is a term
which superficially
means turning around.
It means rotating.
The yuga has a variation
from just turning,
because every sphere that turns
throughout the entire universe
that is spinning has a
specific weight, density, size,
and other characteristics
that caused that turning
to emit a specific sound.
The combination of the movement
and the sound that it emits
is yuga.
That's what yuga means.
These sounds
saturate the expanse
of the ether of the universe.
When they collide,
they interface.
They intermix.
And when these colliding
forces of sonic energy
permeating the ether of
the universe come together,
they form a specific density.
That densification of sound
is what we call substance.
Yuga is a huge term, not only
in terms of the measure of time,
but in terms of the entire
formation of the universe.
Kali is mother of the finality
of the yuga system, and says,
I am Kali, mother and
creator of all these worlds.
I have a tendency
to destroy them.
This is something that
we have popularized.
It is known that Kali Yuga, the
crone of the feminine of Shiva,
brings about
massive destruction.
Let's outline the nature and
the form of the yuga system
so we can begin to see it as
a totality of the whole nature
of time, not just
what we're all aware
of as the destructive
aspect of time,
which we all have to experience
as individuals at death.
The yuga cycle has
been written down
for at least 6,000
years in southern India
and transmitted through
all these time periods.
You think of all
the upheavals that
have occurred in the world,
the Earth, the climate,
and somehow, people hung
on to this teaching.
The yuga is a duration
that has been known
and has been kept secret for
a very long period of time.
As a matter of
fact, anyone who's
ever looked it up in most of
the books that have been printed
on it have looked
at a chart that
holds an intentional
falsification
of the duration of the yugas.
The falsification happened
when the Aryan culture
invaded India.
They took over a lot
of the knowledge that
was held by the
Dravidian population, who
inhabited the Indus Valley
at the time of the invasion.
They drove the Dravidians
south and caused
one of the worst genocides
in history and prehistory.
The duration of the yuga
was kept in Dravidian books.
And some of those books wound
up in the Theosophical library
in Madras.
A French Indologist by
the name of Alain Danielou
lived in India for
20 years and became
associated with the
Nehru family and a lot
of the powerful people in India.
They said Danielou spoke
exquisite Sanskrit.
And he also to the same degree
was able to learn and speak
Dravidian.
Somehow this knowledge about
Alain's linguistic ability
circulated through the
sadhus, the wandering saints
and holy men of India.
One of them came to
him and said, Alain,
it is time that the true
durations of the yugas
become known.
He gave Alain the name
of the text, but not
the actual duration.
And so Alain had to find
the text which contained
the duration of the yuga.
You don't have to believe that
this is the correct duration.
There are many people
who may disagree
with the number we
are going to give you,
but we will show
you the background
so you know the source
of the information that
is to be given.
We will be attempting to
enter into the way Egypt
and India imprinted the key
essence of the yuga system.
This is also found
in Stonehenge.
There are yuga definitions
within the placement of stones
and the movement of
light in relationship
to those monuments.
We'll get through all
of that as we go along.
First, we want to deal with
numbers as representative
of powers and functions that are
inherent in the natural world
and in the human psyche.
Let's take a look
at the reasoning,
or we could say the
rationale, for the yuga
as a number in time
that is explicitly
involved in the
creation and destruction
cycles of the Earth.
The fivefold system
is the progression
that is active in form.
This is one of the major
progressions of numbers
that we live with.
Five is the number from
which our understanding
of the golden mean is generated.
This is a method of
proportioning the growth
of plants and animals.
It's the series
of numbers that is
dominant in the
expression of form.
There's a wonderful
Indian quote on this idea,
and it goes, the divinity in his
act of externalizing his being,
in the form of creation, becomes
so enthralled and bewildered
with his own beauty,
and in that transmit,
he feverishly creates
and devours everything
that he created.
This is why the Puranas,
the ancient texts of India,
say that, hunger is life,
and hunger is death,
and hunger is the lord and
master of these worlds.
The eater while
eating is being eaten.
That's really a
number philosophy,
because with everything
that is created,
there is a continual devouring.
This is going on in our
own body every moment.
We are constantly in a state in
which cells are being composed
and cells are being decomposed.
It all is happening fired
by the spark of devouring.
We all live by devouring
the life of other beings
and other creatures
and other things.
That's the nature
of the universe
that we're dealing with.
To deal with it in terms
of duration and form,
it is necessary to use
two languages in parallel;
one of words and the
other of numbers.
The yugas exist with sets of 10.
That group of 10 is called
the kalpa or a mahakalpa.
It is a group of 10
that defines four ages.
This can be made into a diagram
such as a tetractys This
is one of the diagrams that
Pythagoras got from Egypt
and said was a sacred diagram.
Sacred means permanent or fixed.
And he's saying that this
tetractys is a permanent design
or structure inherent
throughout creation.
It is a preexistent
configuration,
which precedes the coming
into being of the created
or manifest world.
A key definitional relationship
in Hindu philosophy
is the difference between
existence and manifestation.
Existence is an
immaterial configuration
that must have been
created and conceived
prior to the beginning
of the manifest creation.
Existence is the home of time.
Time and the laws of time must
preexist the laws of space.
Space is where form, the formed,
and the manifest world occurs.
It's not the relationship
of time and space
that we began with.
It's consciousness.
It has no hierarchical
value, but consciousness does
precede the activity of space.
In other words, you can conceive
of the existence of time
without space, but you cannot
conceive of the existence
of space without time.
Here is the tetractys inverted.
It is a series of numbers
that starts with 1,
then 3, then 6, then 10.
This is called the
triangular number series,
and this can go on indefinitely.
It also denotes four levels.
Each one of these levels
is one of the four ages
that are contained in a kalpa.
This is the mahakalpa.
Now let's talk about the
duration of the yuga.
This was once so secret that
it was hidden by the Dravidian
culture.
During the Aryan
invasion, it was
hidden in books only in
the Dravidian language.
Now, this is not to say that
the invaders didn't gain access
to it and keep these
secrets for themselves.
Maybe the culture that controls
most of the world's governments
is now using the
knowledge of the yugas
for beneficial and
favorable moments in time.
If so, they're using
this information
to bring about any of
their desired movements
in their controls over society.
What we're working on now is
to extend this as a theory
and see if we can
verify some of its value
as a process of determining
long durations of a cycle.
We'll give you the number that
was held secret for so long.
It's a strange number, but we
will have time in this series
to give you a good sampling
of why one could conjecture
that this is a very valid piece
of genuine gnostic awareness.
With this tetractys, we
can see that the four
ages are comprised of 10 yugas.
The duration of one
yuga is 6,048 years.
If you know the
measurements of the Earth,
this number is very important.
It's part of a series
of numbers that
begins with 54, which is two
times the cube of 3, 54, 108,
216, 432, 864, and so on.
864 times 7 equals 6,048, which
is the duration of one yuga.
Many of the numbers
in this series
represent various
central measurements
of the Earth, the
sun, and the moon.
For example, if we just multiply
one of these numbers, 216,
by 10, we can find 2,160,
which is the diameter
of the moon in miles.
That's a measurement of space.
It's also the duration
of time that it
takes the sun in its
processional cycle
to pass through one
sign of the zodiac.
That's 2,160 years.
Unlike the metric system,
the English miles system
is directly related to the way
the ancients measured space.
The inch, the foot,
the yard, and the mile
are all based on ancient
measuring systems
with deeply sacred roots.
Every number in this series
are multiples of 6, 3, and 9,
which are all multiples of 3.
They are creative.
And they are the numbers which
are found by the people who
developed the yuga philosophy
as the key to the solution,
as well as the composition
of the universe.
The sun is also dominated
by these numbers.
Its movements around the zodiac,
its relationship to the Earth
are denoted by numbers which
are involved with three and six.
Seven is the number
that dominates
the cycles of the moon.
Within this we have the combined
interaction of the greatest
forces on Earth, the forces
that create all the tides,
not only in the ocean, but
the flowing of our blood
through our body.
Everything that moves
tidally moves in combination
with the effects of
the sun and moon.
And these are systems
based on seven and six.
By understanding
the yuga cycles,
we can see that
time, like space,
has dimensional qualities.
In our next episode,
we will further
our examination
of the yuga cycles
and the ramifications of
these cycles on human history.